### a. Total and Conditional Counts

We’ll start with some basic skills, like counting the number of
observations in a dataset.

*Author’s note: there are a bazillion different ways to get a total or
conditional count in R. This is one, fairly simple way for each that
(hopefully!) will be accessible for all R users, and doesn’t involve
installing any packages.*

For now, we’ll create a single variable in-line. Later, when our
analyses get a bit more complex, we can import bigger datasets.

``` r
#importing the data
car.colors = c("red", "black", "red", "blue", "white", "pink", "yellow", "red", "black", "black", "blue", "yellow", "blue", "blue", "blue", "silver")
car.df = data.frame(car.colors)
```

We’ve created a variable called `car.colors`, which I’ve completely made
up, that lists off a bunch of colors of hypothetical cars I observed. I
also created a “dataframe” object, `car.df`, which we’ll often use in R
to store variables within.

We can quickly get a look at the frequencies of each color using the
`table()` function.

``` r
table(car.df$car.colors)
```

    ## 
    ##  black   blue   pink    red silver  white yellow 
    ##      3      5      1      3      1      1      2

I want to pause to notice two things that we did in the previous chunk
of code:

1.  We used the `table()` function, with an input inside the
    parentheses. Functions in R are similar to math functions, in the
    sense that they take in an input or multiple inputs (usually called
    “arguments”).

2.  We referred to `car.colors`, a variable within the `car.df`
    dataframe, using the dollar-sign operator `$`. This operator tells R
    that we’re doing something within a particular dataframe or object.

If we’d like to count the **total** number of cars in the dataset, we
could do the following:

``` r
#count the number of rows in the car.df dataset
nrow(car.df)
```

    ## [1] 16

Great! Now, if we wanted a **conditional** count for the number of cars
in the dataset that are blue:

``` r
#count the number of rows in the car.df dataset where car.colors="blue"
sum(with(car.df, car.colors=="blue"))
```

    ## [1] 5

If you’ve done any work with `if` statements or coding in general
before, the above conditional statement is probably fairly recognizable.
If it isn’t, I’ll break it down: our `with()` function is looking
through the `cars.df` dataset for any row where the `car.colors`
variable equals `"blue"`, and returning a `TRUE` anytime it finds one.
Outside of that, the `sum` function looks across all the `TRUE` values
and counts 5 of them, so it returns `5`.

If you run just the `with()` part without the `sum()` function around
it, you can see why summing the `TRUE` values is helpful:

``` r
with(car.df, car.colors=="blue")
```

    ##  [1] FALSE FALSE FALSE  TRUE FALSE FALSE FALSE FALSE FALSE FALSE  TRUE FALSE
    ## [13]  TRUE  TRUE  TRUE FALSE

You can see which cars are and aren’t blue, but you can’t see a total
conditional count without the `sum()` function!

Finally, we might be interested in calculating the **relative
frequency** of blue cars in our dataset. Instead of plugging the values
into a calculator to calculate `$\frac{blue}{total}$`, we can let R do
the math.

``` r
blue = sum(with(car.df, car.colors=="blue"))
total = nrow(car.df)
blue/total
```

    ## [1] 0.3125

What we just did was:

1.  Create a variable called `blue` equal to our previous conditional
    count for blue cars. Notice that, since we’re just defining a
    variable for R, it doesn’t print out its value for us here.
2.  Create a variable called `total` equal to our previous total count.
3.  Divide `blue/total`. Here, since we are not defining a new variable,
    R does print out the value for us!
